okay folks welcome back this teaching is
going to specifically deal with how to
find explosive price moves before they
happen all right the points of focus in
this
module commitment of
Traders weekly range
contraction and daily range
contraction okay so we're taking a look
at a commitment of Traders report in the
form of a line graph or net Traders
position
chart and that is going to
be
this little graph down here okay this is
not something that I've created or made
up this is a longstanding staple in
technical analysis Larry Williams
popularized this from his uh work with
the commitment Traders or cftc
reportable
report and the commercials this red line
you see commercial speculators I'm only
interested in tracking this red line
okay and by following this on a longer
term time frame it'll help give warning
signs when there's a potential impending
reversal which when it's a reversal they
sometimes can be explosive in
nature but the cftc weekly nit Traders
position is the data that creates this
graph and what we do is we monitor
12-month commercial extremes that means
the highest they've been in the last 12
months or the lowest they've been in the
last 12
months and we look for the levels where
they reflect net Extremes in other words
they will qualify support and resistance
on a higher time frame
chart okay so let's take a closer look
on how we can use this information first
we have to draw in our zero line here so
the zero line delineates anything above
the zero line the Traders that would be
depicted with their respective colors
like the blue speculators they're
usually you know Street money they have
no idea what's going on and the large
speculators are the green okay they're
going to be diametrically opposed to the
commercials Now does not mean that
they're wrong it just means that they
are the ones that are Trend following in
nature you can see as the market dropped
lower on the
Euro the green line depicts that the
large speculators were selling short so
below this zero line
they are
sellers above it denotes buying so we
can see the commercials were buying all
through this decline now right away
you're probably saying well you know how
how's this
useful we want to look at Trend and we
also want look at key levels that the
commercial support this low here they
had the largest position of Longs one at
the time and the market created a
low and we went sideways and then
dropped down one more time we had an
increase of buying by the commercials
and I'll show you what these reference
points are here with this horizontal
line and I'll add our
first area of buying interest by the
commercials and the second one here see
they're ramping up this big jump up in
the red line and another one over here
where they're above the zero line and
we're at that same level so they are
above the zer line and we're at that old
level where it's bounced before so this
could be a key support level now notice
that they are giving you Insight that
you otherwise wouldn't glean if you look
at just simple classic support and
resistance theories again it takes you
back to the question which support which
resistance so from a higher time frame
standpoint this is one of the things I
like to teach because it gives you a
context behind support and resistance
levels that in my opinion are
key now with this understanding in okay
we know that they have been bullish all
this time long period of time for like
two years they were buying buying buying
buying building up large positions and
then we had a rally up notice that this
reaction off here was below these two
equal
lows not surprisingly this move up has
taken us above these two relatively
equal highs and we are potentially in an
area where we could come back down a
little bit lower and that takes me to
the area of business on the commercials
now because look where they're at we're
below the zero line so they may be
indicating a longer term shift
in the direction on the Euro we could
see it come down a little bit lower so
this is a warning flag if you will to
monitor what the euro is most likely
going to do at least from the long-term
standpoint the commercial Traders folks
that are long-term hedgers they're
already hedging in some bearishness on
the euro dollar so I use this
information to kind of like build the
idea around potential future explosive
price
moves okay next we're going to talk
about the weekly range
contraction all right as you can see
here when we use the Open high low and
Clos bar okay this is a graphic
depiction it's very easy to see at least
for me it is when we're using power
three if we're bullish we're going to be
looking at the open price and then drop
down buying anywhere between the opening
price or just a little bit above it's
still okay but mainly looking for a move
below the opening price that's what
we're looking for power three bullish
and when we're bearish we're looking for
the opening price and then a move up to
sell or fade that rally and then ride it
lower for a down close now that's
assuming that we know there's going to
be a large range day or a directional
bias that lends well to this
technique power three capitalizes on
range expansion so we had to know the
likelihood of this phenomenon happening
otherwise we're going to do it wrong so
now if the opposite of range expansion
is contraction how can we find that well
the Candlestick chart helps highlight
this so if we look at a Candlestick like
this say this is a typical large range
day okay which would look like something
like uh this open high low close here it
could be very close to that in terms of
the body portion between the open and
the close so we have the open down here
and the close up here if this is a
bullish
candle if this was the uh body of say
for instance a Tuesday and then say
Wednesday we had this type of body we
have a smaller bodied candle which means
that we could see a large rains day on
Thursday or Friday it's a it's more or
less a uh a precursor if you will
because smaller bodies precede larger
bodies so if we're always looking for
action in The Marketplace and it's
already moving you're chasing price so
you want to anticipate when price is
going to have an explosive or large
range or big move or series of big moves
and it's going to happen by studying the
bodies if the bodies are getting smaller
okay if we see that it's going to be a
directional move in magnitude that's
larger than it has been in recent days
or Rec
weeks again depicting the top of the
body on here and contrasting it with
this one here so that's the difference
between of what I'm looking
for okay so the weekly range
contraction we're going to be looking
for candles that begin to
compress ranges that have smaller bodies
or key that's the ones that we're
looking for and we're wanting to trade
when they form
big ranges come after small ranges
form and we ignore the Wicks we're
focusing only on the bodies of the
candles okay so let's take a couple
examples
here as you can see here at this swing
low we've had large body candle large
body candle and then look how small the
body gets here then we have a turning
point in here price has been moving up
up we went sideways and now look what
happens the bodies between open and the
close they get very very small disregard
the Wicks okay try to block that out
focus only on the open and close
relationship when that gets small what's
about to happen is you're going to see
an expansion and this is when
anticipating power three like the open
here small down move buying holding for
the close near the end of the day at the
top of
range similar scenario here which we can
see again small bodies form after that
large one okay we know there's going to
be a large range coming so we want to be
focusing on what what's the trend it's
been bullish so we can be looking for
open decline buy it look for expansion
on the upside next same scenario open
down movement buy it hold for the close
Okay similarly we can see at this swing
High we have a small little body in here
again disregard the Wix again small
bodied candle in here disregarding the
wix and large moves after each one of
these we're seeing large this is the
weekly chart okay so there's a lot of
Pips in
there another opportunity here you can
barely even see a body in this very very
indicative of a large range move and we
see a series of three weeks that come by
way of bullishness over 300 and some
Pips available from that one then we
have a small range again so what's going
to happen we're looking for range
expansion the candle forms and now at
the time of this recording we have a
very small body candle again so weekly
range has been compressing so we're
looking for a large weekly range
next okay now obviously as I said with
the weekly range everything is the same
for a daily range contraction so without
repeating myself I have it here for your
notes but let's take a look at a couple
examples from the daily perspective
okay we can see up in here after the
swing High we have a very small body
candle disregard the wick we don't care
about that we're looking at the body of
the candle very small little
compression if we are seeing the range
compression and contract smaller and
Tighter we know there's going to be a
large expansion so the next move if it's
directionally determined higher or lower
we can use power three Concept in that
light here we see it's bearish open
rally sell the high hold for the close
so we have several days of down movement
look at the large ranges that just
follows right after that small range
body next opportunity comes in here
price trades down at an old low price
ises a big range down and then we have a
small range day here okay so it's an
inside day relative to the body okay
this is my insight on inside days I
don't care about the Wicks okay uh most
trading team teaching circles authors
gurus whatever they would never classify
this as an inside day because we have
this long Wicked portion of the candle
that went below the previous day so that
would negate this being called a inside
day but from the standpoint that I'm
teaching range expansion and contraction
this is in fact an inside day okay so
that means there's going to be a large
range expansion or a series of movement
that's directional after this day
forms we see that here several up Clos
days okay and creates a swing
high range gets small here so we know
that there's going to be another series
of
movement we have down closed
candles right in here we have small
ranges relative to what's happened
recently okay so there's a rule of thumb
I use I want to see what's happened if
it's a daily chart I want to see what's
happened in the last 5 to seven days
okay I look back about 5 to seven days
for range contraction and expansion
so that filter for volatility on the
daily chart you want to look at about 5
days which is typical trading week but
then I also use seven days because it
may have to look back into the previous
week as well and that gives me this
whole Criterion here and we can see that
there's a
large range day in the last seven days
here so that means these are relatively
small in comparison so we know there's
going to be an expansion due large range
day large range day
and then we go smaller okay looking back
we have a large range day here so these
are relatively small so we know what's
coming large range days Big Range
day okay down here at an old low we
trade below that low and now look what
happens we have small
ranges barely any range here at all big
expansion on the upside and then we go
into a small range here big ranges
come and then right in here after a
swing High small little body okay again
disregard the Wicks they'll trip you up
that's all stop running on both sides of
the marketplace they're taking all the
Traders out and going right back into
the middle and then the big move takes
place down explosive price action on the
cell side reaching for an old low
rejection and now at the time of this
recording last Friday we have a small
range body again so we know there's
going to be expansion due coming in the
next couple days so we would look for
large range days form so as a Trader we
want to see movement and by having a
study of when that movement is expected
not just where to buy where to sell you
have to have an expectation for
magnitude and velocity how much can the
move be seen before it happens is there
going to be excitement and an is it
going to be animated if you will and
what I do is I look for when things are
getting quiet that means the the Traders
are going to get bored with it and when
they're not paying attention to it it
takes off and then everybody else in the
retail world will chase it once it's
expanding I want to be in before the Big
Move happens because I'm most likely
going to be in while it's expanding up
long or expanding lower and being
bearish I hope you enjoyed this
presentation if you'd like to find more
you can visit my website at thein circet
trader.com